README.md, before:

# tcl-core-560z

## Before continuing
There's a simpler and faster method for customizing 
[the official `core.gz` here](https://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php/topic,27458.msg176935.html#msg176935)
to get a smaller `core.gz` which should start correctly when RAM is a bottleneck.
This will get you a version of tinycore linux which will work with the official
`NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files like `alsa-modules-KERNEL.tcz`.

If you build your own kernel with the method described below, starting with kernel 6.12.11, some
`NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files are generated. Starting with 6.13.7.16.6, ipv6-netfilter and wireless .tcz containing
modules are generated.

If you are on a quest to get sound working on the 560z, I modified the cs4236 driver and put the result in the
[cs4237b](./cs4237b/) folder. This gets bundled in the `alsa-modules-6.12.11-tinycore-560z.tcz`. Tinycore 14.0 and
my custom builds before 6.12.11.15.9 would give me `cs4236+ chip detected, but control port 0xffffffff is not valid`.
It looks like a working version of a driver for the CS4237B specifically on the 560z hasn't existed for a
long time. All the workarounds I found on the net didn't work for me. More details in another section below.
I added code changes for 5.10.235 and patches for 6.12.11 and 5.10.235.

### Which `NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files are generated?
#### Replacement for `alsa-modules-KERNEL.tcz` referred to by [`alsa.tcz.dep`](http://tinycorelinux.net/15.x/x86/tcz/alsa.tcz.dep)
- alsa-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- ipv6-netfilter-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- wireless-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
#### Additional custom `NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz`
- net-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- parport-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- pcmcia-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- usb-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
#### No replacement for
- original-modules-KERNEL.tcz
- other KERNEL.tcz not listed here

## Summary
I originally based my custom kernel on the `.config` of
[TCL 12.0](http://tinycorelinux.net/12.x/x86/release/src/kernel/config-5.10.3-tinycore).
I'm now at 6.13.7.16.6. I used `make oldconfig` to move from 5.10.3 to 5.10.232. Then, I moved to 6.12.11 and now to 6.13.7.
I also used `make menuconfig` to unselect many features and change the processor configuration to Pentium II.
The jump from 6.12.11 to 6.13.7 was just a `make oldconfig` and I had to answer a couple of questions from the
oldconfig prompts.

## Why?
My Thinkpad 560z 64 MB of RAM. As far as my experience goes, TCL Core 14.0 is the last version of TCL which can be
supported without trimming `core.gz` or customizing the kernel and modules because the amount of RAM is too small
and `init` won't start. By selecting only the kernel (and modules) features needed and repacking `core.gz`,
it's possible to get a much smaller kernel and boot-up TCL core 15.0 and possibly many other TCL versions
which will come after.

## Why 5.10.235?
This kernel makes tinycore use less RAM and is a bit faster than the v6.x kernels. I tested wifi with 16.0
and it works well. Read more below.
The 5.10 kernels will be supported [by the CIP](https://wiki.linuxfoundation.org/civilinfrastructureplatform/start)
until [2031 according to wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_kernel_version_history).

### 4.4.302-cip97
I started working on using the 4.4.302-cip97 kernel with tinycore. For now, it only works until tinycore 9.x.
Starting with TC 10.x I get FATAL: kernel too old. See my other [tcc repo](https://github.com/linic/tcc) for
some research I'm doing to generate a `rootfs.gz` which may be compatible with 4.4.302-cip97.
I added code in Dockerfile and Dockerfile.edit-config to be able to swap the kernel in most tinycore releases
(tested with 7.x, 8.x, 9.x, 10.x, 11.x, 12.x).

### Why the official TCL Core 15.0 won't start?
Even with a swap partition, TCL Core 15.0 tries to start `init` before loading the swap and since there is 
not enough memory without the swap, `init` fails with codes such as 
[init (error -26) with Core 15.0](https://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php/topic,27458.0.html) (and I also
got error -2 while testing various custom kernels and modules.

## How to build and copy the files out of the images?
To build the custom linux kernel and `core.gz` just call `make`.
This will start build the image to modify the `.config` and you'll be able to interact with the container
to upgrade the `.config` file when trying to build with a more recent kernel. Once the edit step is complete,
the build step will start automatically and will build the kernel and `core.gz. This works also with beta
versions of tinycore since it uses `rootfs.gz`. The artifacts will be in a `release/x.y.z.a.b` directory.

## How to use the custom files on the 560z?
Get those files on the 560z in your preferred way. The scripts in [tools](./tools) could be useful.
You could use [ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) if you put all the files on an FTP server.
[ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) depends on [ftp-get.sh](./tools/ftp-get.sh)
which uses `ftpget` included in the `busybox` which is a core part of tinycore.
[ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) will edit `tce/boot/extlinux/extlinux.conf`
and add a new entry in the boot menu. Reboot and try to boot from the new entry.

## edit-config
The [Dockerfile.edit-config](Dockerfile.edit-config) and
[docker-compose.edit-config.yml](docker-compose.edit-config.yml)
can help edit the [.config](.config) file which are used to build the custom kernel.

Build with: `sudo docker compose --progress=plain -f docker-compose.yml build`
Run with: `sudo docker compose -f docker-compose.yml up`
Edit the [.config](.config) with: `sudo docker exec -it tcl-core-560z-edit-config-main-1 sh`
and then `make menuconfig`

# CS4237B
The 560z uses a CS4237B sound chip. Some forum said to disable the quick boot from the
bios which you can reach by hold F1 and turning on the 560z. I did that, but the control
device which should have been in the list of PNP ISA devices with EISA ID CSC0010 still
wasn't there. I tried a bunch of things to make it appear, but it never did. In any case,
still disable the quick boot because I run with it disabled and with my modifications
to the cs4236 driver sound does end up working.

I remove `cport` and `cimage` from the snd cs4236 driver. See files here [cs4237b](./cs4237b/).
I also simplified and deleted code which would not run because the `chip->hardware` is
`WSS_HW_CS4237B`. I clarified many variables and methods and added comments. I based my changes
on the code in the linux kernel 6.12.11. See [cs4237b/patches](./cs4237b/patches/) for patch
files.

# wifi with rtl8192cu
Using 5.10.235.16.6 it's possible to get wifi working with an rtl8192 chip. Kernels
sometime after 6.1.2 timeout on my 560z when it is the time to authenticate and associate
with the access point.

## tools
See the [tools](./tools/) for scripts which automate many steps
to get and install the files generated in the docker containers.
### desktop.sh
[tools/desktop.sh](./tools/desktop.sh) downloads the extensions required to start the desktop and starts it.
### ftp-get-kernel.sh
[tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) downloads the custom kernel files from an FTP server on the 560z.
It also places the files in the right directories on the 560z and modifies the `extlinux.conf` to have a new selectable
entry after reboot.
Note that you need to get your own FTP server if you want to use this.
### get-sound-tczs.sh
[tools/get-sound-tczs.sh](./tools/get-sound-tczs.sh) gets the extensions required by [tools/init-sound.sh](./tools/init-sound.sh)
### init-sound.sh
I'm using [tools/init-sound.sh](./tools/init-sound.sh) to correctly load the modules, restore
the card's configuration and have `mpg123` available to play an .mp3 file to test sound.
Note that `/home/tc/configuration/asound.state` won't exist the first time.
You'll have to run manually:
```
tce-load -i alsa-config
tce-load -i alsa
alsamixer
```
and set the master volume and the pcm volume to 100. Then,
```
sudo alsactl store CS4237B
sudo cp /usr/local/etc/alsa/asound.state /home/tc/configuration/
```
You should then be able to `mpg123 your.mp3` to play a file.
Still no sound? Try `sudo alsactl init CS4237B`. I sometimes
have to do that maybe because some registers of the CS4237B are
set to the go to the wrong values...? Also unmute the sound
using the Fn and volume keys of your keyboard. Make sure you
hear the "beep" the volume up keybaoard key produces.
### net.sh
Loads the modules to get the Realtek 8152 USB ethernet adapter working.
### ip.sh
Set the ip address and default route.
#### IPv6
IPv6 also work starting with 6.13.7.16.6. `tce-load -i ipv6-netfilter-6.13.7-tinycore-560z` and then copy the
[tools/ip.sh](./tools/ip.sh) and edit it to set IPv6 addresses. I was able to ping a computer on my LAN.
### prepare-upgrade.sh
Backs up the extensions in a new directory to prepare for an upgrade.

Commit message:

Updated README.md with hub.docker.com linichotmailca/tcl-core-560z

README.md, after:

# tcl-core-560z

## Before continuing
There's a simpler and faster method for customizing 
[the official `core.gz` here](https://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php/topic,27458.msg176935.html#msg176935)
to get a smaller `core.gz` which should start correctly when RAM is a bottleneck.
This will get you a version of tinycore linux which will work with the official
`NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files like `alsa-modules-KERNEL.tcz`.

If you build your own kernel with the method described below, starting with kernel 6.12.11, some
`NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files are generated. Starting with 6.13.7.16.6, ipv6-netfilter and wireless .tcz containing
modules are generated.

If you are on a quest to get sound working on the 560z, I modified the cs4236 driver and put the result in the
[cs4237b](./cs4237b/) folder. This gets bundled in the `alsa-modules-6.12.11-tinycore-560z.tcz`. Tinycore 14.0 and
my custom builds before 6.12.11.15.9 would give me `cs4236+ chip detected, but control port 0xffffffff is not valid`.
It looks like a working version of a driver for the CS4237B specifically on the 560z hasn't existed for a
long time. All the workarounds I found on the net didn't work for me. More details in another section below.
I added code changes for 5.10.235 and patches for 6.12.11 and 5.10.235.

## Releases Details
Each release artifacts are built using docker. The docker images which have built them are available on [hub.docker.com at linichotmailca/tcl-core-560z](https://hub.docker.com/r/linichotmailca/tcl-core-560z).

### Which `NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz` files are generated?
#### Replacement for `alsa-modules-KERNEL.tcz` referred to by [`alsa.tcz.dep`](http://tinycorelinux.net/15.x/x86/tcz/alsa.tcz.dep)
- alsa-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- ipv6-netfilter-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- wireless-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
#### Additional custom `NAME-modules-KERNEL.tcz`
- net-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- parport-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- pcmcia-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
- usb-modules-6.13.7-tinycore-560z.tcz
#### No replacement for
- original-modules-KERNEL.tcz
- other KERNEL.tcz not listed here

## Summary
I originally based my custom kernel on the `.config` of
[TCL 12.0](http://tinycorelinux.net/12.x/x86/release/src/kernel/config-5.10.3-tinycore).
I'm now at 6.13.7.16.6. I used `make oldconfig` to move from 5.10.3 to 5.10.232. Then, I moved to 6.12.11 and now to 6.13.7.
I also used `make menuconfig` to unselect many features and change the processor configuration to Pentium II.
The jump from 6.12.11 to 6.13.7 was just a `make oldconfig` and I had to answer a couple of questions from the
oldconfig prompts.

## Why?
My Thinkpad 560z 64 MB of RAM. As far as my experience goes, TCL Core 14.0 is the last version of TCL which can be
supported without trimming `core.gz` or customizing the kernel and modules because the amount of RAM is too small
and `init` won't start. By selecting only the kernel (and modules) features needed and repacking `core.gz`,
it's possible to get a much smaller kernel and boot-up TCL core 15.0 and possibly many other TCL versions
which will come after.

## Why 5.10.235?
This kernel makes tinycore use less RAM and is a bit faster than the v6.x kernels. I tested wifi with 16.0
and it works well. Read more below.
The 5.10 kernels will be supported [by the CIP](https://wiki.linuxfoundation.org/civilinfrastructureplatform/start)
until [2031 according to wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_kernel_version_history).

### 4.4.302-cip97
I started working on using the 4.4.302-cip97 kernel with tinycore. For now, it only works until tinycore 9.x.
Starting with TC 10.x I get FATAL: kernel too old. See my other [tcc repo](https://github.com/linic/tcc) for
some research I'm doing to generate a `rootfs.gz` which may be compatible with 4.4.302-cip97.
I added code in Dockerfile and Dockerfile.edit-config to be able to swap the kernel in most tinycore releases
(tested with 7.x, 8.x, 9.x, 10.x, 11.x, 12.x).

### Why the official TCL Core 15.0 won't start?
Even with a swap partition, TCL Core 15.0 tries to start `init` before loading the swap and since there is 
not enough memory without the swap, `init` fails with codes such as 
[init (error -26) with Core 15.0](https://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php/topic,27458.0.html) (and I also
got error -2 while testing various custom kernels and modules.

## How to build and copy the files out of the images?
To build the custom linux kernel and `core.gz` just call `make`.
This will start build the image to modify the `.config` and you'll be able to interact with the container
to upgrade the `.config` file when trying to build with a more recent kernel. Once the edit step is complete,
the build step will start automatically and will build the kernel and `core.gz. This works also with beta
versions of tinycore since it uses `rootfs.gz`. The artifacts will be in a `release/x.y.z.a.b` directory.

## How to use the custom files on the 560z?
Get those files on the 560z in your preferred way. The scripts in [tools](./tools) could be useful.
You could use [ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) if you put all the files on an FTP server.
[ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) depends on [ftp-get.sh](./tools/ftp-get.sh)
which uses `ftpget` included in the `busybox` which is a core part of tinycore.
[ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) will edit `tce/boot/extlinux/extlinux.conf`
and add a new entry in the boot menu. Reboot and try to boot from the new entry.

## edit-config
The [Dockerfile.edit-config](Dockerfile.edit-config) and
[docker-compose.edit-config.yml](docker-compose.edit-config.yml)
can help edit the [.config](.config) file which are used to build the custom kernel.

Build with: `sudo docker compose --progress=plain -f docker-compose.yml build`
Run with: `sudo docker compose -f docker-compose.yml up`
Edit the [.config](.config) with: `sudo docker exec -it tcl-core-560z-edit-config-main-1 sh`
and then `make menuconfig`

# CS4237B
The 560z uses a CS4237B sound chip. Some forum said to disable the quick boot from the
bios which you can reach by hold F1 and turning on the 560z. I did that, but the control
device which should have been in the list of PNP ISA devices with EISA ID CSC0010 still
wasn't there. I tried a bunch of things to make it appear, but it never did. In any case,
still disable the quick boot because I run with it disabled and with my modifications
to the cs4236 driver sound does end up working.

I remove `cport` and `cimage` from the snd cs4236 driver. See files here [cs4237b](./cs4237b/).
I also simplified and deleted code which would not run because the `chip->hardware` is
`WSS_HW_CS4237B`. I clarified many variables and methods and added comments. I based my changes
on the code in the linux kernel 6.12.11. See [cs4237b/patches](./cs4237b/patches/) for patch
files.

# wifi with rtl8192cu
Using 5.10.235.16.6 it's possible to get wifi working with an rtl8192 chip. Kernels
sometime after 6.1.2 timeout on my 560z when it is the time to authenticate and associate
with the access point.

## tools
See the [tools](./tools/) for scripts which automate many steps
to get and install the files generated in the docker containers.
### desktop.sh
[tools/desktop.sh](./tools/desktop.sh) downloads the extensions required to start the desktop and starts it.
### ftp-get-kernel.sh
[tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh](./tools/ftp-get-kernel.sh) downloads the custom kernel files from an FTP server on the 560z.
It also places the files in the right directories on the 560z and modifies the `extlinux.conf` to have a new selectable
entry after reboot.
Note that you need to get your own FTP server if you want to use this.
### get-sound-tczs.sh
[tools/get-sound-tczs.sh](./tools/get-sound-tczs.sh) gets the extensions required by [tools/init-sound.sh](./tools/init-sound.sh)
### init-sound.sh
I'm using [tools/init-sound.sh](./tools/init-sound.sh) to correctly load the modules, restore
the card's configuration and have `mpg123` available to play an .mp3 file to test sound.
Note that `/home/tc/configuration/asound.state` won't exist the first time.
You'll have to run manually:
```
tce-load -i alsa-config
tce-load -i alsa
alsamixer
```
and set the master volume and the pcm volume to 100. Then,
```
sudo alsactl store CS4237B
sudo cp /usr/local/etc/alsa/asound.state /home/tc/configuration/
```
You should then be able to `mpg123 your.mp3` to play a file.
Still no sound? Try `sudo alsactl init CS4237B`. I sometimes
have to do that maybe because some registers of the CS4237B are
set to the go to the wrong values...? Also unmute the sound
using the Fn and volume keys of your keyboard. Make sure you
hear the "beep" the volume up keybaoard key produces.
### net.sh
Loads the modules to get the Realtek 8152 USB ethernet adapter working.
### ip.sh
Set the ip address and default route.
#### IPv6
IPv6 also work starting with 6.13.7.16.6. `tce-load -i ipv6-netfilter-6.13.7-tinycore-560z` and then copy the
[tools/ip.sh](./tools/ip.sh) and edit it to set IPv6 addresses. I was able to ping a computer on my LAN.
### prepare-upgrade.sh
Backs up the extensions in a new directory to prepare for an upgrade.
